[DOCS] Adds docs to semantic text (#108311)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/mapping/types/semantic-text.asciidoc

Reviewer: We need to add the new type to the [field data types](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/mapping-types.html) page as well

Reviewer 2: @carlosdelest Should we describe the dynamic template restrictions in this doc?

Author: I'd defer to @carlosdelest about this one. Should we add anything here about this?

Reviewer: I don't think it must be advertised as the error message is descriptive enough. Not a strong opinion, but I think this is not such an important use case to deserve a note.

Reviewer: ++

Author: I'd defer to @carlosdelest about this one. Should we add anything here about this?

Reviewer: Other fields that can't be used in multi-fields (like `sparse_vector` and `dense_vector`) does not advertise the fact. I vote no.

<titleabbrev>Semantic text</titleabbrev>
++++

beta[]

The `semantic_text` field type automatically generates embeddings for text
content using an inference service. 

The `semantic_text` field type specifies an `inference_id` of the 

> {ml-docs}/ml-nlp.html[NLP model] that will be used to generate the embeddings.

Reviewer: Good point. Let's keep the references at the inference endpoint level.

> The `semantic_text` field type specifies an `inference_id` that you can create
> by using the <<put-inference-api>> that will be used to generate embeddings.
> This field type and the <<query-dsl-semantic-query,`semantic` query>> type make
> it simpler to perform semantic search on your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `semantic_text` field type specifies an inference endpoint identifier that will be used to generate embeddings.
You can create the inference endpoint by using the <<put-inference-api>>.
This field type and the <<query-dsl-semantic-query,`semantic` query>> type make it simpler to perform semantic search on your data.
```

Using `semantic_text`, you won't need to specify how to generate embeddings for
your data, or how to index it. The inference endpoint automatically determines
the embedding generation, indexing, and query to use.

[source,console]
------------------------------------------------------------
PUT my-index-000001

> {
>     "mappings": {
>         "properties": {
>             "inference_field": { 
>                 "type": "semantic_text",
>                 "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint"
> 	     }
>         }
>     }
> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{
  "mappings": {
    "properties": {
      "inference_field": { 
        "type": "semantic_text",
        "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-params]]
==== Parameters for `semantic_text` fields

`inference_id`::
(Required, string)  
Inference endpoint that will be used to generate the embeddings for the field.
Use the <<put-inference-api>> to create the endpoint.

[discrete]
[[infer-service-validation]]
==== {infer-cap} service validation

> The `inference_id` will not be validated when the mapping is created, but when documents are ingested into the index.

Reviewer: I believe that could be part of the query docs. I think the field type should be oriented to doc ingestion.

When the first document is indexed, the `inference_id` will be used to generate underlying indexing structures for the field.

[discrete]
[[auto-text-chunking]]
==== Automatic text chunking

{infer-cap} endpoints have a limit on the amount of text they can process.

> To allow for large amounts of text to be used in semantic search, `semantic_text` automatically generates smaller passages if needed called _chunks_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow for large amounts of text to be used in semantic search, `semantic_text` automatically generates smaller passages if needed, called _chunks_.
```

> Each chunk will include the text subpassage and its corresponding embedding generated from it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each chunk will include the text subpassage and the corresponding embedding generated from it.
```

> When querying, the individual passages will be automatically searched for each document, and the score combined to obtain relevant results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When querying, the individual passages will be automatically searched for each document, and the most relevant passage will be retrieved as a result.
```

> When querying, the individual passages will be automatically searched for each document, and the score combined to obtain relevant results.

Reviewer: Added this as a suggestion below

[discrete]
[[semantic-text-structure]]
==== `semantic_text` structure

Once a document is ingested, a `semantic_text` field will have the following structure:

[source,console-result]
------------------------------------------------------------
"inference_field": {
  "text": "these are not the droids you're looking for", <1>
  "inference": {

>     "inference_id": "my-elser-model", <2>

Reviewer 3: Note that if you change the `inference_id` above it needs to be changed here as well

>     "inference_id": "my-elser-model", <2>

Author: ```suggestion
    "inference_id": "my-elser-endpoint", <2>
```

    "model_settings": { <3>
      "task_type": "sparse_embedding"
    },
    "chunks": [ <4>
      {
        "text": "these are not the droids you're looking for",
        "embeddings": {
		(...)
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
------------------------------------------------------------
// TEST[skip:TBD]
<1> The field will become an object structure to accommodate both the original
text and the inference results.
<2> The `inference_id` used to generate the embeddings.
<3> Model settings, including the task type and dimensions/similarity if
applicable.
<4> Inference results will be grouped in chunks, each with its corresponding
text and embeddings.

Refer to <<semantic-search-semantic-text,this tutorial>> to learn more about

> semantic search using `semantic_text` and `semantic_query`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
semantic search using `semantic_text` and the `semantic` query.
```

> semantic search using `semantic_text` and `semantic_query`.

Reviewer: Please leave GitHub suggestions as it's far easier to incorporate them for the author 😉 . Adding suggestion below

[discrete]
[[custom-indexing]]
==== Customizing `semantic_text` indexing

`semantic_text` uses defaults for indexing data based on the {infer} endpoint
specified. It enables you to quickstart your semantic search by providing
automatic {infer} and a dedicated query so you don't need to provide further
details.

In case you want to customize data indexing, use the
<<sparse-vector,`sparse_vector`>> or <<dense-vector,`dense_vector`>> field
types and create an ingest pipeline with an
<<inference-processor, {infer} processor>> to generate the embeddings.
<<semantic-search-inference,This tutorial>> walks you through the process.

> NOTE: Updates that use scripts are not supported when the index contains a `semantic_text` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[discrete]
Now that I see the rendering, I think the note is weaker and has no anchor to a specific section. How about changing it to its own section?

[[custom-indexing]]
==== Updates to `semantic_text` fields

Updates that use scripts are not supported when the index contains a `semantic_text` field.
```

> NOTE: Update that uses a script is not supported when the index contains a `semantic_text` field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: Updates that use scripts are not supported when the index contains a `semantic_text` field.
```

[discrete]
[[copy-to-support]]
==== `copy_to` support

The `semantic_text` field type can be the target of
<<copy-to,`copy_to` fields>>. This means you can use a single `semantic_text`
field to copy the values of other fields. Each value has its embeddings
calculated separately; each field value is a separate chunk in the resulting

> embeddings.

Reviewer: Good point, though hard to turn it into something less confusing. I'll give it a try

> calculated separately; each field value is a separate chunk in the resulting
> embeddings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
calculated separately; each field value will be separately chunked if necessary, and included as separate chunks in the resulting embeddings.
```

> This imposes some restrictions on updating documents with `semantic_text`:

Reviewer 2: We don't support update via script when an index contains a `semantic_text` field, should we add that here?

Reviewer: I think copy_to deserves its own section, it's useful for users to understand the possibility to use this. But I'm open to suggestions and @szabosteve criteria here.

Author: I agree to have a dedicated section for `copy_to`. If we have more restrictions to list that are unrelated to `copy_to`, then we should add a section for restrictions. If we have only this one (update via script is not supported), then it's better to just add an IMPORTANT or NOTE callout with the info. WDYT?

Reviewer: It makes sense to use a NOTE here from my PoV. Thanks @szabosteve !

> This imposes restrictions on updating documents with `semantic_text`:
> 
> * In bulk requests, all fields that are copied to a `semantic_text` field must
> have a value to ensure every embedding is calculated correctly.

Reviewer: There's a single restriction - no use on having bullet points here.

```suggestion
This imposes a restriction on bulk updates to documents with `semantic_text`. 
In bulk requests, all fields that are copied to a `semantic_text` field must have a value to ensure every embedding is calculated correctly.
```

> fields have not been changed.

Reviewer 2: This isn't true anymore, we're removing this restriction in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/108880

Reviewer: Correct! Changing it below
